feat(presets): support relative paths inside a preset repo (#45211)
renovatebot/renovate: docs/usage/config-presets.md

Renovate resolves the relative reference to the source, repository and tag of the preset which contains the reference.
This means you can move or fork a preset repository, or pin it to a tag, without editing the references inside the presets.

| Syntax | Resolves relative to                                       |
| ------ | ---------------------------------------------------------- |
| `./x`  | the directory of the preset file with the reference        |
| `../x` | the parent directory of the preset file with the reference |
| `/x`   | the root of the preset repository                          |

For example, take a preset repository with this layout:

```
default.json
system/registries.json
security/base.json
```

The `default.json` file can reference the other presets like this:

```json
{
  "extends": ["./system/registries", "/security/base"]
}
```

If a repository extends `github>org/repo#v2.0.0`, then Renovate resolves the two references to `github>org/repo//system/registries#v2.0.0` and `github>org/repo//security/base#v2.0.0`.
The tag `v2.0.0` is inherited, so all presets are read from the same tag.

!!! note
  Relative references only work inside presets.

>   Renovate does not accept them in a repository's own `renovate.json`, in an inherited config, or in `globalExtends`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Renovate does not accept them in a repository config, in an inherited config, or in `globalExtends`.
```

Author: I think my variant makes it more clear that we are talking about that specific renovate file rather than like `default.json`.

| `./x`  | the directory of the preset file with the reference        |
| `../x` | the parent directory of the preset file with the reference |
| `/x`   | the root of the preset repository                          |

For example, take a preset repository with this layout:

```
default.json
system/registries.json
security/base.json
```

The `default.json` file can reference the other presets like this:

```json
{
  "extends": ["./system/registries", "/security/base"]
}
```

If a repository extends `github>org/repo#v2.0.0`, then Renovate resolves the two references to `github>org/repo//system/registries#v2.0.0` and `github>org/repo//security/base#v2.0.0`.
The tag `v2.0.0` is inherited, so all presets are read from the same tag.

!!! note
  Relative references only work inside presets.
  Renovate does not accept them in a repository's own `renovate.json`, in an inherited config, or in `globalExtends`.
  The `renovate-config-validator` accepts relative references in any file, so a relative reference in a repository's own config only fails when Renovate runs, and not during validation.

Some more things to know about relative references:

> - You can not add a `#tag` to a relative reference, because the tag is always inherited from the referencing preset

Reviewer 2: Should this be config validation warning/error? (It may be, I've not read further down yet)

Author: Yes, it triggers one https://github.com/renovatebot/renovate/pull/45211/changes#diff-4f61948ca2055d06f6933b6e746ffe5d1e8bdb02086702b766212c4b9968e7afR1966

> - A relative reference always points to a preset _file_, you can not reference a sub-preset key inside a file with a relative reference, this is the same limitation as for the `//path` syntax

Reviewer 2: > you can not reference a sub-preset key inside a file with a relative reference

What do you mean by this?

Author: Preset files can contain fields like this: 

Subpreset example
```json
{
  "preset-a": { ... },
  "preset-b": { ... }
}
```

But this is not supported with file paths right now

Reviewer 3: it should never be supported. nested presets are a kind of deprecated

> - Relative references are supported for `github`, `gitlab`, `gitea`, `forgejo` and `local` presets

Reviewer 2: Is that all of them? Or are any unsupported?

Reviewer 2: Ah, I guess not HTTP(S)?

Author: Yes, no `http` and no `npm`

- Parameters are supported, for example `./group(eslint)`, and the parameters may contain a Handlebars template like `./group({{ env.TEAM }})`
- References whose _path_ contains a Handlebars template, like `./{{ env.SOME_VAR }}/base`, are not rewritten, so they fail to resolve

> - The `ignorePresets` entries of a preset may also use the relative form, Renovate resolves them in the same way as the `extends` entries of that preset

Reviewer 2: Does that mean you'd be able to ignore `./security/base`? If so, that may appear in many places but you'd reject all of them 🤔

Author: You would ignore by the full reference 
https://github.com/renovatebot/renovate/pull/45211/changes#diff-3d9467eb14d298becd6f4618c5e6003b34060fedcc24d26441bbc3ba5db79c7fR300

Reviewer 3: we need some samples for how to ignore those relative presets

- A reference which resolves to the `default` preset at the root of the repository, like `/default`, is resolved to the plain repository form such as `github>org/repo#v2.0.0`

!!! note
  Relative references inside an `onboardingConfig` are canonicalized as well, including the inherited tag.
  This means an onboarded repository gets an absolute preset string like `github>org/repo//system/registries#v2.0.0`, which resolves from that repository.

To ignore a relatively-referenced preset with `ignorePresets`, use the absolute preset string which Renovate resolved, including the inherited tag:

```json
{
  "extends": ["github>org/repo#v2.0.0"],
  "ignorePresets": ["github>org/repo//system/registries#v2.0.0"]
}
```

!!! warning
  A relative reference which cannot be resolved causes a configuration error in every repository which extends the preset.

>   Preset authors should therefore validate their preset repository in CI, for example with the `renovate-config-validator`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Preset authors should therefore validate their preset repository in CI, for example with the `renovate-config-validator` CLI.
```

or

```suggestion
  Preset authors should therefore validate their preset repository in CI, for example with `renovate-config-validator`.
```
